post.md, before:

# Lab 4: Microcontrollers, Sensors and Actuators

## Overview and Motivation
This week, we explored actuators, or circuit components that interact with real life elements. We will then use these to create a distance detector that changes pitch based on how far an object is away from our sensor. The two actuators we will use are the ultrasonic distance sensor and the buzzer.

Actuators are important because they "actualize" our circuit. It means our circuits can have real world effects, either by reading outputs in the real world (ultrasonic sensor) or by playing a sound (buzzer). Therefore, it is important to explore the role of actuators in circuits. Plus, they are realy cool!

## Materials
1. PB-503 (breadboard)
2. Electrical Wires
3. Buzzer
4. Ultrasonic Sensor
5. Arduino Kit
6. Ruler
7. A flat surface (one the ultrasonic sensor can consistently detect)

## Part 1: Buzzer

The buzzer is a device that emits a sound whose pitch is based on how fast voltage changes from +5V to 0V and back, also known as the frequency of the signal. This is demonstrated through the square wave generator on the left of the breadboard. When we change the signal to 5hz, this means it is oscillating from +5V to 0V 5 times in 1 second. With only a breadboard, the buzzer is easy to understand. However, we can also use an Arduino to further control its behavior.

<img width="413" alt="image" src="https://github.com/mlcourses/lab-4-blog-post-khoanguyen12345/assets/67582698/adf820df-50cf-42f8-8842-f4f7706d7760">

This is the code for the Arduino to control the buzzer. We first indicate the "Buzzer" pin, or the output of the Arduino going into the buzzer. this will serve as a substitute to our square function generator. We then run a for loop, where the signal outputted by the arduino will go from High to Low, with p delay in between. To make the pitch go higher, we can reduce p, thus increasing the frequency of the voltage oscillations going into the buzzer. To make the pitch go lower, we can instead reduce p.

Another way to tone the buzzer using the Arduino is to use the tone() function. The tone() function takes in 2 arguments, the pin number and the an integer (the frequerncy to be set) and sets the frequency of the arduino to that second argument. The tone function has an optional third argument, which can change the duration of the tone from infinite as long as the buzzer is plugged in to a fixed duration. Another option to change the tone is to add a delay and then call another tone function that sets the frequency to another frequency, thus, alternating two different pitches. The code below uses the tone() function:

<img width="252" alt="image" src="https://github.com/mlcourses/lab-4-blog-post-khoanguyen12345/assets/67582698/c1cfbde1-e663-4666-b13e-9c015859cd07">

These are the videos testing the buzzer with the square function generator and the Arduino:

With square function generator:
https://github.com/mlcourses/lab-4-blog-post-khoanguyen12345/assets/67582698/05b6322d-1c1f-40bc-8caa-2e20c8304c4f

With arduino:
https://github.com/mlcourses/lab-4-blog-post-khoanguyen12345/assets/67582698/2604b2b2-c265-4272-ade1-c1edd22e37f4


## Part 2: Ultrasonic Sensor

The ultrasonic sensor emits an ultrasonic wave that reflects off of a surface and "receives" that signal. The time in between is then used to calculate the distance of the surface from the sensor. The code for the sensor can be seen below:

<img width="485" alt="image" src="https://github.com/mlcourses/lab-4-blog-post-khoanguyen12345/assets/67582698/582a0447-3cbe-4b35-8448-4bcd1805beed">

When a high signal is sent to the ultrasonic sensor, it starts sending out an ultrasonic signal. The low signal puts the ultrasonic sensor on "receiving mode" and so, it would start "sensing" for the signal it sent out. pulseIn() is an Arduino function that takes in two arguments, the first being the pin number and the second being either HIGH or LOW. If it is set to HIGH, it means the Arduino unit will start timing when the signal goes from LOW to HIGH and will stop when the signal goes back to LOW.

This is a video showing the ultrasonic sensor in effect, with a ruler:

https://github.com/mlcourses/lab-4-blog-post-khoanguyen12345/assets/67582698/8d9b2b23-10d3-4768-9e67-57fa3ae7bc9f

## Part 3: Distance detector with buzzer and ultrasonic sensor

#### Goal
The goal of this part is to build a distance detector with an ultrasonic sensor and a buzzer. Part of this process is also determining a scale for the pitch of the buzzer in relation to the number produced by the ultrasonic sensor. If the object is further away from the ultrasonic sensor, it should produce a low humming sound, then get higher and louder as it approaches the sensor, though never going over 15000hz, the highest pitch humans can comfortably hear.

#### Continuous Range Distance Sensor
We first had to "connect" the buzzer to the distance detector, or, in other words, connect the "distance" result of the ultrasonic sensor to the buzzer. The code below does this:

<img width="342" alt="image" src="https://github.com/mlcourses/lab-4-blog-post-khoanguyen12345/assets/67582698/0096e2e7-5fa9-4229-a22c-8a7d61272e8e">

We constructed this code using the two code snippets above. The first body of the code in void loop() is an exact copy of the body of the block of code in the ultrasonic sensor section above. The distance that is returned from the sensor is then put into the buzzer and multiplied by 100 to match the pitch range audible to humans, from 100hz at 1cm to 100000hz at 100cm. The video below shows this implementation:

#### Video of buzzer with pitch louder as it is further away

However, this does not work as we want. We instead want the buzzer to have a higher pitch as we get closer to the sensor and to have a lower, humming pitch as we get further away. This is an easy fix, however, as we can just take the maximum distance and subtract the current distance, thus "flipping" the scale of the pitch. The code below does this:

<img width="355" alt="image" src="https://github.com/mlcourses/lab-4-blog-post-khoanguyen12345/assets/67582698/0b5a2609-2964-4557-bdb8-2451a881506a">

Instead of having distance * 100, we now have (100-distance)*100. This makes it so that the pitch increases as we get closer since distance will be a smaller number, and the pitch decreases as we get further away. We tested our continuous range distance sensor where the pitch decreases with distance. The distance sensor is explained below:

#### Video of buzzer with pitch lower as it is further away

One application of this circuit is to build a discrete scale for the distance sensor. A discrete scale is one that increases the pitch step by step, instead of having a continuous increase. 5-10cm would play one pitch, then 10-15cm would play another pitch, 15-20cm would play a third pitch, etc. This gave us the idea of music and musical notes.

#### Video of discrete scale ultrasonic distance sensor

We played twinkle twinkle little star with our discrete scale ultrasonic distance sensor!

#### Video of twinkle twinkle little star

## Conclusion

Commit message:

finished conclusion ,part 3, no video yet for part 3

post.md, after:

# Lab 4: Microcontrollers, Sensors and Actuators

## Overview and Motivation
This week, we explored actuators and sensors, circuit components that interact with real life elements. We will  use these to create a distance detector that changes pitch based on how far an object is away from our sensor. The two components we will use are the ultrasonic distance sensor and the buzzer.

Actuators and sensors are important because they "actualize" our circuit. It means our circuits can have real world effects, either by detecting inputs from the real world (ultrasonic sensor) or by playing a sound (buzzer). Therefore, it is important to explore the role of actuators and sensors in circuits. Plus, they are realy cool!

## Materials
1. PB-503 (breadboard)
2. Electrical Wires
3. Buzzer
4. Ultrasonic Sensor
5. Arduino Kit
6. Ruler
7. A flat surface (one the ultrasonic sensor can consistently detect)

## Part 1: Buzzer

The buzzer is a device that emits a sound whose pitch is based on how fast voltage changes from +5V to 0V and back, also known as the frequency of the signal. This is demonstrated through the square wave generator on the left of the breadboard. When we change the signal to 5hz, this means it is oscillating from +5V to 0V 5 times in 1 second. With only a breadboard, the buzzer is easy to understand. However, we can also use an Arduino to further control its behavior.

<img width="413" alt="image" src="https://github.com/mlcourses/lab-4-blog-post-khoanguyen12345/assets/67582698/adf820df-50cf-42f8-8842-f4f7706d7760">

This is the code for the Arduino to control the buzzer. We first indicate the "Buzzer" pin, or the output of the Arduino going into the buzzer. this will serve as a substitute to our square function generator. We then run a for loop, where the signal outputted by the arduino will go from High to Low, with p delay in between. To make the pitch go higher, we can reduce p, thus increasing the frequency of the voltage oscillations going into the buzzer. To make the pitch go lower, we can instead reduce p.

Another way to tone the buzzer using the Arduino is to use the tone() function. The tone() function takes in 2 arguments, the pin number and the an integer (the frequerncy to be set) and sets the frequency of the arduino to that second argument. The tone function has an optional third argument, which can change the duration of the tone from infinite as long as the buzzer is plugged in to a fixed duration. Another option to change the tone is to add a delay and then call another tone function that sets the frequency to another frequency, thus, alternating two different pitches. The code below uses the tone() function:

<img width="252" alt="image" src="https://github.com/mlcourses/lab-4-blog-post-khoanguyen12345/assets/67582698/c1cfbde1-e663-4666-b13e-9c015859cd07">

These are the videos testing the buzzer with the square function generator and the Arduino:

With square function generator:
https://github.com/mlcourses/lab-4-blog-post-khoanguyen12345/assets/67582698/05b6322d-1c1f-40bc-8caa-2e20c8304c4f

With arduino:
https://github.com/mlcourses/lab-4-blog-post-khoanguyen12345/assets/67582698/2604b2b2-c265-4272-ade1-c1edd22e37f4


## Part 2: Ultrasonic Sensor

The ultrasonic sensor emits an ultrasonic wave that reflects off of a surface and "receives" that signal. The time in between is then used to calculate the distance of the surface from the sensor. The code for the sensor can be seen below:

<img width="485" alt="image" src="https://github.com/mlcourses/lab-4-blog-post-khoanguyen12345/assets/67582698/582a0447-3cbe-4b35-8448-4bcd1805beed">

When a high signal is sent to the ultrasonic sensor, it starts sending out an ultrasonic signal. The low signal puts the ultrasonic sensor on "receiving mode" and so, it would start "sensing" for the signal it sent out. pulseIn() is an Arduino function that takes in two arguments, the first being the pin number and the second being either HIGH or LOW. If it is set to HIGH, it means the Arduino unit will start timing when the signal goes from LOW to HIGH and will stop when the signal goes back to LOW.

This is a video showing the ultrasonic sensor in effect, with a ruler:

https://github.com/mlcourses/lab-4-blog-post-khoanguyen12345/assets/67582698/8d9b2b23-10d3-4768-9e67-57fa3ae7bc9f

## Part 3: Distance detector with buzzer and ultrasonic sensor

#### Goal
The goal of this part is to build a distance detector with an ultrasonic sensor and a buzzer. Part of this process is also determining a scale for the pitch of the buzzer in relation to the number produced by the ultrasonic sensor. If the object is further away from the ultrasonic sensor, it should produce a low humming sound, then get higher and louder as it approaches the sensor, though never going over 15000hz, the highest pitch humans can comfortably hear.

#### Continuous Range Distance Sensor
We first had to "connect" the buzzer to the distance detector, or, in other words, connect the "distance" result of the ultrasonic sensor to the buzzer. The code below does this:

<img width="342" alt="image" src="https://github.com/mlcourses/lab-4-blog-post-khoanguyen12345/assets/67582698/0096e2e7-5fa9-4229-a22c-8a7d61272e8e">

We constructed this code using the two code snippets above. The first body of the code in void loop() is an exact copy of the body of the block of code in the ultrasonic sensor section above. The distance that is returned from the sensor is then put into the buzzer and multiplied by 100 to match the pitch range audible to humans, from 100hz at 1cm to 100000hz at 100cm. The video below shows this implementation:

#### Video of buzzer with pitch louder as it is further away

However, this does not work as we want. We instead want the buzzer to have a higher pitch as we get closer to the sensor and to have a lower, humming pitch as we get further away. This is an easy fix, however, as we can just take the maximum distance and subtract the current distance, thus "flipping" the scale of the pitch. The code below does this:

<img width="355" alt="image" src="https://github.com/mlcourses/lab-4-blog-post-khoanguyen12345/assets/67582698/0b5a2609-2964-4557-bdb8-2451a881506a">

Instead of having distance * 100, we now have (100-distance)*100. This makes it so that the pitch increases as we get closer since distance will be a smaller number, and the pitch decreases as we get further away. We tested our continuous range distance sensor where the pitch decreases with distance. The distance sensor is explained below:

#### Video of buzzer with pitch lower as it is further away

One application of this circuit is to build a discrete scale for the distance sensor. A discrete scale is one that increases the pitch step by step, instead of having a continuous increase. 5-10cm would play one pitch, then 10-15cm would play another pitch, 15-20cm would play a third pitch, etc. This gave us the idea of music and musical notes. This required us to research more about musical notes. The graph below (taken from Produce Like a Pro) shows the different octaves, notes and their frequencies.

![image](https://github.com/mlcourses/lab-4-blog-post-khoanguyen12345/assets/67582698/0d5c19ab-32b4-469b-bf36-cba8e129ce0c)

We decided that we wanted our musical notes to be in octave 4, meaning that frequencies would range from 261hz to 494hz. We also decided that 5cm would equal one note change. Therefore, we had the following code.

<img width="367" alt="image" src="https://github.com/mlcourses/lab-4-blog-post-khoanguyen12345/assets/67582698/550d9df1-6458-4a63-82cd-1ca639c96b31">

Notice the conversion function. It floor divides the distance by 5, the  multiplies it by 17. This means that the pitch will only change by 17 whenever there is an increment of 5 from the sensor. This would make the increases discrete. The function also adds 261 to the result because 261 is the starting frequency. We then tone the buzzer with the result of our conversion algorithm. Below is a video of it in action.

#### Video of discrete scale ultrasonic distance sensor

We looked up the notes to Twinkle Twinlle Little Star and "played" it with our distance sensor!

#### Video of twinkle twinkle little star

## Conclusion
In conclusion, actuators and sensors can be wire to the circuit to read real-world inputs. We demonstrated the capabilities of them through our discrete scale ultrasonic distance sensor. There are many other actuators and sensors (e.g light sensor, servo) that can be used to accomplish different tasks. Through this lab, we also learnt how to connect the output of a sensor as the input of an actuator.
